## URL (URI) parsing

```c
#define FIO_URL
#include "fio-stl.h"
```

URIs (Universal Resource Identifier), commonly referred to as URL (Uniform Resource Locator), are a common way to describe network and file addresses.

A common use case for URIs is within the command line interface (CLI), allowing a client to point at a resource that may be local (i.e., `file:///users/etc/my.conf`) or remote (i.e. `http://example.com/conf`).

By defining `FIO_URL`, the following types and functions will be defined:

#### `fio_url_s`

```c
/** the result returned by `fio_url_parse` */
typedef struct {
  fio_buf_info_s scheme;
  fio_buf_info_s user;
  fio_buf_info_s password;
  fio_buf_info_s host;
  fio_buf_info_s port;
  fio_buf_info_s path;
  fio_buf_info_s query;
  fio_buf_info_s target;
} fio_url_s;
```

The `fio_url_s` contains a information about a URL (or, URI).

When the information is returned from `fio_url_parse`, the strings in the `fio_url_s` (i.e., `url.scheme.buf`) are **not NUL terminated**, since the parser is non-destructive, with zero-copy and zero-allocation.

#### `fio_buf_info_s` - revisited

The `fio_buf_info_s` is used to return information about the parts of the URL's string buffers detailed above. Since the `fio_url_s` does not return NUL terminated strings, this returned data structure is used.

```c
typedef struct fio_buf_info_s {
  /** The buffer's address (may be NULL if no buffer). */
  char *buf;
  /** The buffer's length, if any. */
  size_t len;
} fio_buf_info_s;
```

See [Binary Data Informational Types and Helpers](#binary-data-informational-types-and-helpers) for more details.

#### `fio_url_parse`

```c
fio_url_s fio_url_parse(const char *url, size_t len);
```

Parses the URI returning it's components and their lengths (no decoding performed, **doesn't accept decoded URIs**).

The returned string are **not NUL terminated**, they are merely locations within the original (unmodified) string.

This function attempts to accept many different formats, including any of the following:

* `/complete_path?query#target`

  i.e.: `/index.html?page=1#list`

* `host:port/complete_path?query#target`

  i.e.:
  - `example.com`
  - `example.com:8080`
  - `example.com/index.html`
  - `example.com:8080/index.html`
  - `example.com:8080/index.html?key=val#target`

* `user:password@host:port/path?query#target`

  i.e.: `user:1234@example.com:8080/index.html`

* `username[:password]@host[:port][...]`

  i.e.: `john:1234@example.com`

* `schema://user:password@host:port/path?query#target`

  i.e.: `http://example.com/index.html?page=1#list`

* `file://some/path`

  i.e.: `file://./relative/path`
  i.e.: `file:///absolute/path`

Invalid formats might produce unexpected results. No error testing performed.

The `file`, `unix` and `priv` schemas are special in the sense that they produce no `host` (only `path`) and are parsed as if they contain file path information.


#### `fio_url_is_tls`

```c
fio_url_tls_info_s fio_url_is_tls(fio_url_s u);
/* Return type for  `fio_url_is_tls` */
typedef struct {
  fio_buf_info_s key;
  fio_buf_info_s cert;
  fio_buf_info_s pass;
  bool tls; /* true if TLS is requested by according to the URL */
} fio_url_tls_info_s;
```

Returns TLS data associated with the URL.

This function supports implicit TLS by scheme data for the following possible values:

- `wss`   - Secure WebSockets.
- `sses`  - Secure SSE (Server Sent Events).
- `https` - Secure HTTP.
- `tcps`  - Secure TCP/IP.
- `tls`   - Secure TCP/IP.
- `udps`  - Secure UDP.

i.e.:

- "tls://example.com/"
- "tcps://example.com/"
- "udps://example.com/"
- "wss://example.com/"
- "https://example.com/"
- "sses://example.com/"

This function also supports explicit TLS by query data for the following possible key-pair values:

- `tls`                   - self-signed TLS (unless key / cert are provided).
- `tls=true`              - self-signed TLS (unless key / cert are provided).
- `tls=<file>`            - key and certificate files (same path / prefix, one ends with "key.pem" the other with "cert.pem").
- `key=<file/env_data>`   - path or env variable name for the private key.
- `cert=<file/env_data>`  - path or env variable name for the public certificate.
- `pass`                  - password for decrypting key data.

i.e.:

- "tcp://example.com/?tls"           (anonymous TLS)
- "udp://example.com/?tls=true"      (anonymous TLS)
- "https://example.com/?tls=key_cert_folder_or_prefix&pass=key_password"
- "https://example.com/?key=key_file_or_env_var&cert=cert_file_or_env_var&pass=key_password"
- "wss://example.com/?key=key_file_or_env_var&cert=cert_file_or_env_var&pass=key_password"
- "tcp://example.com/?key=key_file_or_env_var&cert=cert_file_or_env_var&pass=key_password"

#### `FIO_URL_QUERY_EACH`

```c
/** The type used by the `FIO_URL_QUERY_EACH` iterator macro. */
typedef struct {
  fio_buf_info_s name;
  fio_buf_info_s value;
  fio_buf_info_s private___;
} fio_url_query_each_s;

/** A helper function for the `FIO_URL_QUERY_EACH` macro implementation. */
FIO_SFUNC fio_url_query_each_s fio_url_query_each_next(fio_url_query_each_s);

/** Iterates through each of the query elements. */
#define FIO_URL_QUERY_EACH(query_buf, i)                                       \
  for (fio_url_query_each_s i = fio_url_query_each_next(                       \
           (fio_url_query_each_s){.private___ = (query_buf)});                 \
       i.name.buf;                                                             \
       i = fio_url_query_each_next(i))
```

The macro accepts a `fio_buf_info_s` argument (`query_buf`) and iterates over each `name` and `value` pair in the query buffer.

**Note**: both `i.name` and `i.value` may be empty strings, with a valid `.buf` but with `.len` set to zero.

**Note**: the iterator does not unescape URL escaped data. unescaping may be required before either `i.name` or `i.value` can be used.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
