## Memory Allocation

The facil.io Simple Template Library includes a fast, concurrent, memory allocator designed for shot-medium object life-spans.

It's ideal if all long-term allocations are performed during the start-up phase or using a different memory allocator.

The allocator is very fast and protects against fragmentation issues when used correctly (when abused, fragmentation may increase).

Allocated memory is always zeroed out and aligned on a 16 byte boundary.

Reallocated memory is always aligned on a 16 byte boundary but it might be filled with junk data after the valid data. This can be minimized to (up to) 16 bytes of junk data by using [`fio_realloc2`](#fio_realloc2).

Memory allocation overhead is ~ 0.05% (1/2048 bytes per byte, or 16 bytes per 32Kb). In addition there's a small per-process overhead for the allocator's state-machine (usually just 1 page / 4Kb per process, unless you have more then 250 CPU cores). 

The memory allocator assumes multiple concurrent allocation/deallocation, short to medium life spans (memory is freed shortly, but not immediately, after it was allocated) and relatively small allocations - anything over `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_ALLOC_LIMIT` (192Kb) is forwarded to `mmap`.

The memory allocator can be used in conjuncture with the system's `malloc` to minimize heap fragmentation (long-life objects use `malloc`, short life objects use `fio_malloc`) or as a memory pool for specific objects (when used as static functions in a specific C file).

Long term allocation can use `fio_mmap` to directly allocate memory from the system. The overhead for `fio_mmap` is 16 bytes per allocation (freed with `fio_free`).

**Note**: this custom allocator could increase memory fragmentation if long-life allocations are performed periodically (rather than performed during startup). Use [`fio_mmap`](#fio_mmap) or the system's `malloc` for long-term allocations.

### Memory Allocator Overview

The memory allocator uses `mmap` to collect memory from the system.

Each allocation collects ~8Mb from the system, aligned on a constant alignment boundary (except direct `mmap` allocation for large `fio_malloc` or `fio_mmap` calls).

By default, this memory is divided into 256Kb blocks which are added to a doubly linked "free" list (controlled by the `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_SIZE_LOG` value, which also controls the alignment).

The allocator utilizes per-CPU arenas / bins to allow for concurrent memory allocations across threads and to minimize lock contention.

Each arena / bin collects a single block and allocates "slices" as required by `fio_malloc`/`fio_realloc`.

The `fio_free` function will return the whole memory block to the free list as a single unit once the whole of the allocations for that block were freed (no small-allocation "free list" and no per-slice meta-data).

The memory collected from the system (the 8Mb) will be returned to the system once all the memory was both allocated and freed (or during cleanup).

To replace the system's `malloc` function family compile with the `FIO_OVERRIDE_MALLOC` defined (`-DFIO_OVERRIDE_MALLOC`).

It should be possible to use tcmalloc or jemalloc alongside facil.io's allocator. It's also possible to prevent facil.io's custom allocator from compiling by defining `FIO_MALLOC_FORCE_SYSTEM` (`-DFIO_MALLOC_FORCE_SYSTEM`).

### The Memory Allocator's API

The functions were designed to be a drop in replacement to the system's memory allocation functions (`malloc`, `free` and friends).

Where some improvement could be made, it was made using an added function name to add improved functionality (such as `fio_realloc2`).

By defining `FIO_MALLOC`, the following functions will be defined:

#### `fio_malloc`

```c
void * fio_malloc(size_t size);
```

Allocates memory using a per-CPU core block memory pool. Memory is zeroed out.

Allocations above FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_ALLOC_LIMIT (defaults to 75% of a memory block, 192Kb) will be redirected to `mmap`, as if `fio_mmap` was called.

#### `fio_calloc`

```c
void * fio_calloc(size_t size_per_unit, size_t unit_count);
```

Same as calling `fio_malloc(size_per_unit * unit_count)`;

Allocations above FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_ALLOC_LIMIT (defaults to 75% of a memory block, 192Kb) will be redirected to `mmap`, as if `fio_mmap` was called.

#### `fio_free`

```c
void fio_free(void *ptr);
```

Frees memory that was allocated using this library.

#### `fio_realloc`

```c
void * fio_realloc(void *ptr, size_t new_size);
```

Re-allocates memory. An attempt to avoid copying the data is made only for big memory allocations (larger than FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_ALLOC_LIMIT).

#### `fio_realloc2`

```c
void * fio_realloc2(void *ptr, size_t new_size, size_t copy_length);
```

Re-allocates memory. An attempt to avoid copying the data is made only for big memory allocations (larger than FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_ALLOC_LIMIT).

This variation is slightly faster as it might copy less data.

#### `fio_mmap`

```c
void * fio_mmap(size_t size);
```

Allocates memory directly using `mmap`, this is preferred for objects that both require almost a page of memory (or more) and expect a long lifetime.

However, since this allocation will invoke the system call (`mmap`), it will be inherently slower.

`fio_free` can be used for deallocating the memory.

#### `fio_malloc_after_fork`

```c
void fio_malloc_after_fork(void);
```

Never fork a multi-threaded process. Doing so might corrupt the memory allocation system. The risk is more relevant for child processes.

However, if a multi-threaded process, calling this function from the child process would perform a best attempt at mitigating any arising issues (at the expense of possible leaks).

### Memory Allocation Customization Macros

The following macros allow control over the custom memory allocator performance or behavior.

#### `FIO_MALLOC_FORCE_SYSTEM`

If `FIO_MALLOC_FORCE_SYSTEM` is defined, the facil.io memory allocator functions will simply pass requests through to the system's memory allocator (`calloc` / `free`) rather then use the facil.io custom allocator.

#### `FIO_MALLOC_OVERRIDE_SYSTEM`

If `FIO_MALLOC_OVERRIDE_SYSTEM` is defined, the facil.io memory allocator will replace the system's memory allocator.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_SIZE_LOG`

Controls the size of a memory block in logarithmic value, 15 == 32Kb, 16 == 64Kb, etc'.

Defaults to 18, resulting in a memory block size of 256Kb and a `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_ALLOC_LIMIT` of 192Kb.

Lower values improve fragmentation handling while increasing costs for memory block rotation (per arena) and large size allocations.

Larger values improve allocation speeds.

The `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_SIZE_LOG` limit is 20 (the memory allocator will break at that point).

#### `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_ALLOC_LIMIT`

The memory pool allocation size limit. By default, this is 75% of a memory block (see `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_SIZE_LOG`).

#### `FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT_MAX`

Sets the maximum number of memory arenas to initialize. Defaults to 64.

The custom memory allocator will initialize as many arenas as the CPU cores detected, but no more than `FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT_MAX`.

When set to `0` the number of arenas will always match the maximum number of detected CPU cores.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT_DEFAULT`

The default number of memory arenas to initialize when CPU core detection fails or isn't available. Defaults to `5`.

Normally, facil.io tries to initialize as many memory allocation arenas as the number of CPU cores. This value will only be used if core detection isn't available or fails.

### Memory Allocation Status Macros

#### `FIO_MEM_INTERNAL_MALLOC`

Set to 0 when `fio_malloc` routes to the system allocator (`calloc(size, 1)`) or set to 1 when using the facil.io allocator.

This is mostly relevant when calling `fio_realloc2`, since the system allocator might return memory with junk data while the facil.io memory allocator returns memory that was zeroed out.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_SIZE`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_SIZE ((uintptr_t)1 << FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_SIZE_LOG)
```

The resulting memory block size, depends on `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_SIZE_LOG`.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
