## URL (URI) parsing

URIs (Universal Resource Identifier), commonly referred to as URL (Uniform Resource Locator), are a common way to describe network and file addresses.

A common use case for URIs is within the command line interface (CLI), allowing a client to point at a resource that may be local (i.e., `file:///users/etc/my.conf`) or remote (i.e. `http://example.com/conf`).

By defining `FIO_URL`, the following types and functions will be defined:

#### `fio_url_s`

```c
/** the result returned by `fio_url_parse` */
typedef struct {
  fio_buf_info_s scheme;
  fio_buf_info_s user;
  fio_buf_info_s password;
  fio_buf_info_s host;
  fio_buf_info_s port;
  fio_buf_info_s path;
  fio_buf_info_s query;
  fio_buf_info_s target;
} fio_url_s;
```

The `fio_url_s` contains a information about a URL (or, URI).

When the information is returned from `fio_url_parse`, the strings in the `fio_url_s` (i.e., `url.scheme.buf`) are **not NUL terminated**, since the parser is non-destructive, with zero-copy and zero-allocation.

#### `fio_buf_info_s`

The `fio_buf_info_s` data structure contains information about buffer / string addresses and their length. Since the `fio_url_s` does not return NUL terminated strings, this returned data structure is used.

This helper type is defined like so:

```c
typedef struct fio_buf_info_s {
  /** The buffer's address (may be NULL if no buffer). */
  char *buf;
  /** The buffer's length, if any. */
  size_t len;
} fio_buf_info_s;
```

This information type, accessible using the `STR_info` function, allows direct access and manipulation of the string data.

Changes in string length should be followed by a call to `STR_resize`.

The data in the string object is always NUL terminated. However, string data might contain binary data, where NUL is a valid character, so using C string functions isn't advised.
#### `fio_url_parse`

```c
fio_url_s fio_url_parse(const char *url, size_t len);
```

Parses the URI returning it's components and their lengths (no decoding performed, **doesn't accept decoded URIs**).

The returned string are **not NUL terminated**, they are merely locations within the original (unmodified) string.

This function attempts to accept many different formats, including any of the following:

* `/complete_path?query#target`

  i.e.: `/index.html?page=1#list`

* `host:port/complete_path?query#target`

  i.e.:
  - `example.com`
  - `example.com:8080`
  - `example.com/index.html`
  - `example.com:8080/index.html`
  - `example.com:8080/index.html?key=val#target`

* `user:password@host:port/path?query#target`

  i.e.: `user:1234@example.com:8080/index.html`

* `username[:password]@host[:port][...]`

  i.e.: `john:1234@example.com`

* `schema://user:password@host:port/path?query#target`

  i.e.: `http://example.com/index.html?page=1#list`

Invalid formats might produce unexpected results. No error testing performed.

The `file` and `unix` schemas are special in the sense that they produce no `host` (only `path`).

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
