## Local Memory Allocation

The facil.io Simple Template Library includes a fast, concurrent, local memory allocator designed for shot-medium object life-spans.

Multiple allocators can be defined using `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` and including `fio-stl.h` multiple times.

The shortcut `FIO_MALLOC` MACRO will define a local memory allocator shared by any facil.io types that are defined after that macro (in multiple `include` space).

When `FIO_MEMORY_DISABLE` is defined, all custom memory allocators will route to the system's `malloc`.

### Why Use a Local Memory Allocation?

Using a local memory allocator allows types to [enjoy locality and enhanced performance within their allocation subgroup](https://youtu.be/nZNd5FjSquk).

The facil.io Simple Template Library includes a fast, concurrent, memory allocator designed for shot-medium object life-spans.

Multiple allocators can be defined using the `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` macro, allowing different objects types to have different memory allocators, resulting in better cache locality and less contention in multi-threaded programs.

The facil.io allocator also increases security by zero-ing out the memory earlier and always returning zeroed out memory (see default `FIO_MEMORY_INITIALIZE_ALLOCATIONS`).

Reallocated memory might be filled with junk data after the valid data, but this allocator solves this issue by offering [`fio_realloc2`](#fio_realloc2).

Memory allocation overhead is small  ~ 0.006% by default, which is about 1 byte per 16,384 bytes). In addition there's a small per-process overhead for the allocator's state-machine (usually just 1 page / 4Kb per process). 

However, the allocator is designed for common network scenarios where all long-term allocations are performed during the start-up phase or using a different memory allocator. It's also designed to favor smaller allocations and has a limit on the number of bytes it could handle before passing through to `mmap`.

The memory allocator can be used in conjuncture with the system's `malloc` to minimize heap fragmentation (long-life objects use `malloc`, short life objects use `fio_malloc`) or as a memory pool for specific objects.

**Note**: this custom allocator could increase memory fragmentation if long-life allocations are performed periodically (rather than performed during startup). Use [`fio_mmap`](#fio_mmap) or the system's `malloc` for long-term allocations.

### Memory Allocator Overview

To minimize contention, the memory allocator uses allocation "arenas" that can work independently, allowing a number of threads to allocate memory in parallel with other threads (depending on the number of arenas).

The memory allocator collects "chunks" of memory from the system.

Each chunk is divided into "blocks" or used in whole as a "big-blocks".

Each block is assigned to an arena. Big block allocations aren't assigned to arenas and can't be performed in parallel.

Blocks and big-blocks are "sliced" in a similar manner to `sbrk` in order to allocate memory to the user.

A block (or big-block) is returned to the allocator for reuse only when it's memory was fully freed. A leaked allocation will prevent a block / big-block from being released back to the allocator.

If all the blocks in a memory chunk were freed, the chunk is either cached or returned to the system, according to the allocator's settings.

This behavior, including the allocator's default alignment, can be tuned / changed using compile-time macros.

It should be possible to use tcmalloc or jemalloc alongside facil.io's allocator.

It's also possible to prevent facil.io's custom allocator from compiling by defining `FIO_MEMORY_DISABLE` (`-DFIO_MEMORY_DISABLE`).


### Memory Helpers API


#### `fio_memset_aligned`

```c
void fio_memset_aligned(void *dest, uint64_t data, size_t bytes);
```

A machine native CPU word aligned `memset` alternative using a somewhat naive implementation with loop unrolling.

Requires BOTH addresses to be aligned on native memory boundary addresses for a "word" (i.e., 8 bytes on 64 bit machines). This implementation should also work (though probably slower) on CPUs that do not require memory alignment.

This implementation is probably significantly **slower** than the one included with your compiler's C library, especially for larger memory blocks. On my computer, the difference is significant with byte lengths over 65Kb (probably due to CPU caching limits). For smaller buffer sizes, the assumption of a memory aligned address usually minimizes some overhead and allows for competitive performance.


#### `fio_memcpy_aligned`

```c
void fio_memcpy_aligned(void *dest_, const void *src_, size_t bytes);
```

A machine native CPU word aligned `memcpy` alternative using a somewhat naive implementation with loop unrolling.

This can also be used safely as a `memmove` replacement (with overlapping memory regions).

Requires address to be aligned on native memory boundary address for a "word" (i.e., 8 bytes on 64 bit machines). This implementation should also work (though probably slower) on CPUs that do not require memory alignment.

This implementation is probably significantly **slower** than the one included with your compiler's C library, especially for larger memory blocks. On my computer, the difference is significant with byte lengths over 65Kb (probably due to CPU caching limits). For smaller buffer sizes, the assumption of a memory aligned address usually minimizes some overhead and allows for competitive performance.


### The Memory Allocator's API

The functions were designed to be a drop in replacement to the system's memory allocation functions (`malloc`, `free` and friends).

Where some improvement could be made, it was made using an added function name to add improved functionality (such as `fio_realloc2`).

**Note**: the prefix `fio` will be different according to the `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` macro, it is used here because this is the prefix defined when using the `FIO_MALLOC` shortcut macro.

#### `fio_malloc`

```c
void * fio_malloc(size_t size);
```

Allocates memory of requested size, using the defined alignment (`FIO_MEMORY_ALIGN_LOG`).

Memory is **always** zeroed out, no need to manually zero the memory after allocation.

Allocations above the allocator's per-arena limit will be redirected to a large allocation chunk if enabled (see `FIO_MEMORY_ENABLE_BIG_ALLOC`).

Allocations above the allocator limit will be redirected to `mmap`, as if `fio_mmap` was called.

**Note**: the prefix `fio` will be different according to the `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` macro, it is used here because this is the prefix defined when using the `FIO_MALLOC` shortcut macro.

#### `fio_calloc`

```c
void * fio_realloc2(void *ptr, size_t new_size, size_t copy_length);
```

Same as calling `fio_malloc(size_per_unit * unit_count)`.

**Note**: the prefix `fio` will be different according to the `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` macro, it is used here because this is the prefix defined when using the `FIO_MALLOC` shortcut macro.

#### `fio_realloc`

```c
void * fio_realloc(void *ptr, size_t new_size);
```

Re-allocates memory. An attempt to avoid copying the data is made only for memory allocations that are performed directly against the system (sizes over the allocator limit).

**Note**: when reallocating, junk data may be copied onto the new allocation unit. It is better to use `fio_realloc2`.

**Note**: the prefix `fio` will be different according to the `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` macro, it is used here because this is the prefix defined when using the `FIO_MALLOC` shortcut macro.

#### `fio_realloc2`

```c
void * fio_realloc2(void *ptr, size_t new_size, size_t copy_length);
```

Re-allocates memory. An attempt to avoid copying the data is made only for memory allocations that are performed directly against the system (sizes over the allocator limit).

This variation could be significantly faster as it will copy less data.

This variation also promises that any memory over `copy_length` is zeroed out.

**Note**: the prefix `fio` will be different according to the `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` macro, it is used here because this is the prefix defined when using the `FIO_MALLOC` shortcut macro.

#### `fio_mmap`

```c
void * fio_mmap(size_t size);
```

Allocates memory directly using `mmap`, this is preferred for objects that both require almost a page of memory (or more) and expect a long lifetime.

However, since this allocation will invoke the system call (`mmap`), it will be inherently slower.

`fio_free` can be used for deallocating the memory.

**Note**: some overhead is added to the `size` allocation (about the same size as the alignment required), in order to store the allocation size information.

**Note**: the prefix `fio` will be different according to the `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` macro, it is used here because this is the prefix defined when using the `FIO_MALLOC` shortcut macro.

#### `fio_free`

```c
void fio_free(void *ptr);
```

Frees memory that was allocated using this allocator.

If memory was allocator using a different allocator,behavior is undefined... i.e.: with some bad luck, nothing will happen, not even a memory leak, with some good luck the program will crash and expose the bug.

**Note**: the prefix `fio` will be different according to the `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` macro, it is used here because this is the prefix defined when using the `FIO_MALLOC` shortcut macro.

**Note2**: if `fio_free` is called **after** the allocator had been "destroyed" (cleanup occurred.


#### `fio_malloc_after_fork`

```c
void fio_malloc_after_fork(void);
```

Never fork a multi-threaded process. Doing so might corrupt the memory allocation system. The risk is more relevant for child processes.

However, if a multi-threaded process, calling this function from the child process would perform a best attempt at mitigating any arising issues (at the expense of possible leaks).

**Note**: the prefix `fio` will be different according to the `FIO_MEMORY_NAME` macro, it is used here because this is the prefix defined when using the `FIO_MALLOC` shortcut macro.


### Memory Allocator Creation MACROS

#### `FIO_MALLOC` (shortcut)

This shortcut macros defines a general allocator with the prefix `fio` (i.e., `fio_malloc`, `fio_free`, etc').

The general allocator settings consume more memory to allow for higher relative performance when using the memory pool as a generic allocator rather than an object specific memory pool.

Some setup macros are automatically defined and the `FIO_MEM_REALLOC` macro family are automatically updated.


It is similar to using:

```c
/* for a general allocator, increase system allocation size to 8Gb */
#define FIO_MEMORY_SYS_ALLOCATION_SIZE_LOG 23
/* for a general allocator, increase cache size */
#define FIO_MEMORY_CACHE_SLOTS 8
/* set fragmentation cost at 0.5Mb blocks */
#define FIO_MEMORY_BLOCKS_PER_ALLOCATION_LOG 5
/* support big allocations using undivided memory chunks */
#define FIO_MEMORY_ENABLE_BIG_ALLOC 1
/* secure by default */
#define FIO_MEMORY_INITIALIZE_ALLOCATIONS 1

#undef FIO_MEM_REALLOC
#undef FIO_MEM_FREE
#undef FIO_MEM_REALLOC_IS_SAFE

/*
* Set if FIO_MEM_REALLOC copies only what was asked,
* and the rest of the memory is initialized (as if returned from calloc).
*/
#define FIO_MEM_REALLOC_IS_SAFE fio_realloc_is_safe()

/** Reallocates memory, copying (at least) `copy_len` if necessary. */
#define FIO_MEM_REALLOC(ptr, old_size, new_size, copy_len) fio_realloc2((ptr), (new_size), (copy_len))
/** Frees allocated memory. */
#define FIO_MEM_FREE(ptr, size) fio_free((ptr))
```

**Note**: this macro also (re)defines the `FIO_MEM_REALLOC_IS_SAFE` macro, allowing you to know if `fio_malloc` (and it's feature of memory being zeroed out) is available.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_NAME`

**REQUIRED**: the prefix for the memory-pool allocator.

This also automatically updates the temporary memory allocation macros (`FIO_MEM_REALLOC_`, etc') so all types defined in the same `include` statement as the allocator will use this allocator instead of the default allocator assigned using `FIO_MEM_REALLOC` (nothe the `_`).

#### `FIO_MALLOC_OVERRIDE_SYSTEM`

Overrides the system's default `malloc` to use this allocator instead.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_ALIGN_LOG`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_ALIGN_LOG 4
```

Sets the memory allocation alignment log. This starts with 8 byte alignment (value of 3) and accepts values up to 1024 (value of 10).

The default is 4 (16 byte alignment) which is the X64 requirement for SIMD instructions (SSE).

Allocation alignment, if set, **must** be >= 3 and <= 10.

This macro automatically defines the `FIO_MEMORY_ALIGN_SIZE` macro for internal use.

### Memory Allocator Configuration MACROS

The following compile time MACROS can effect the tuning and configuration of the resulting memory allocator.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_INITIALIZE_ALLOCATIONS`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_INITIALIZE_ALLOCATIONS FIO_MEMORY_INITIALIZE_ALLOCATIONS_DEFAULT
```

If true, all allocations (including `realloc2` but excluding `realloc`) will return initialized memory memory and memory will be zeroed out earlier.

**Note**: when using `realloc` (vs., `realloc2`), the allocator does not know the size of the original allocation or its copy limits, so the memory isn't guaranteed to be initialized unless using `realloc2` which promises that any memory over `copy_len`is initialized.

The default value is controlled by the macro `FIO_MEMORY_INITIALIZE_ALLOCATIONS_DEFAULT`.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_INITIALIZE_ALLOCATIONS_DEFAULT`

```c
/* secure by default */
#define FIO_MEMORY_INITIALIZE_ALLOCATIONS_DEFAULT 1
```

Controls the default behavior for facil.io memory allocators (see `FIO_MEMORY_INITIALIZE_ALLOCATIONS`).

To increase performance, at the expense of the improved security and features provided by an allocator that zeros out memory early and often, set this value to 0.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_SYS_ALLOCATION_SIZE_LOG`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_SYS_ALLOCATION_SIZE_LOG 21
```

The logarithmic size of a single allocatiion "chunk" (16 blocks).

Limited to >=17 and <=24.

By default 22, which is a \~2Mb allocation per system call, resulting in a maximum allocation size of 131Kb.

This macro automatically defines the `FIO_MEMORY_SYS_ALLOCATION_SIZE` macro for internal use.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_CACHE_SLOTS`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_CACHE_SLOTS 4
```

The number of system allocation "chunks" to cache even if they are not in use.


#### `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCKS_PER_ALLOCATION_LOG`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_BLOCKS_PER_ALLOCATION_LOG 2 /* 8 blocks per allocation */
```

The number of blocks per system allocation.

More blocks protect against fragmentation and improve memory leak detection, but lower the maximum number of bytes that can be allocated without reverting to large allocations (see `FIO_MEMORY_ENABLE_BIG_ALLOC`) or `fio_mmap`.

**Range**: 0-4

**Recommended**: depends on object allocation sizes, usually 1 or 2.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_ENABLE_BIG_ALLOC`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_ENABLE_BIG_ALLOC 1
```

Uses a whole system allocation to support bigger allocations.

Using big allocations could increase fragmentation costs for large long-life objects and decrease the chance of a memory-leak detection.

However, if there are no bugs in the system and objects have shot/medium lifespans, this could increase performance for larger allocations as it could avoid system calls.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT -1
```

Memory arenas mitigate thread contention while using more memory.

Note that at some point arenas are statistically irrelevant (except when benchmarking contention in multi-core machines).

Zero / negative values will result in dynamic selection based on CPU core count.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT_FALLBACK`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT_FALLBACK 8
```

Used when the dynamic arena count calculations fails.

**Note**: relevant if `FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT` is zero/negative, since dynamic arena calculation is performed using CPU core calculation.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT_MAX`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT_MAX 32
```

Defines the maximum number of arenas to allocate when using dynamic arena calculation.

**Note**: relevant if `FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT` is zero/negative, since dynamic arena calculation is performed using CPU core calculation.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_USE_THREAD_MUTEX`

```c
/*
* If arena count isn't linked to the CPU count, threads might busy-spin.
* It is better to slow wait than fast busy spin when the work in the lock is longer...
* and system allocations are performed inside arena locks.
*/
#if FIO_MEMORY_ARENA_COUNT > 0
#define FIO_MEMORY_USE_THREAD_MUTEX 1
#else
#define FIO_MEMORY_USE_THREAD_MUTEX 0
#endif
```

If true, uses a `pthread mutex` instead of a `fio_lock_i` spinlock.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_WARMUP`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_WARMUP 0
```

If set to a number, will allocate memory on startup to the number of arenas indicated.

It is usually better to avoid this unless using a single arena.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_USE_FIO_MEMSET`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_USE_FIO_MEMSET 0
```

If true, uses a facil.io custom implementation for an 8 byte aligned `memset`.

It's recommended to avoid this unless a compiler / system doesn't have its own optimized implementation for zeroing out pages.

#### `FIO_MEMORY_USE_FIO_MEMCOPY`

```c
#define FIO_MEMORY_USE_FIO_MEMCOPY 1
```

If true, uses a facil.io custom implementation for an 8 byte aligned `memcpy`.

Since the memory is known to be aligned, it's sometimes faster to use the facil.io aligned implementation that the system's generic implementation.

#### `FIO_MEM_PAGE_ALLOC`, `FIO_MEM_PAGE_REALLOC` and `FIO_MEM_PAGE_FREE`

```c
#define FIO_MEM_PAGE_ALLOC(pages, alignment_log)                               \
  FIO_MEM_PAGE_ALLOC_def_func((pages), (alignment_log))

#define FIO_MEM_PAGE_REALLOC(ptr, old_pages, new_pages, alignment_log)         \
  FIO_MEM_PAGE_REALLOC_def_func((ptr), (old_pages), (new_pages), (alignment_log))

#define FIO_MEM_PAGE_FREE(ptr, pages)                                          \
  FIO_MEM_PAGE_FREE_def_func((ptr), (pages))
```

These MACROS, when all of them are defined, allow the memory allocator to collect memory from the system using an alternative method.

This allows the allocator to be used in situations where `mmap` is unavailable.

**Note:** the alignment property for the allocated memory is essential and may me quite large (see `FIO_MEMORY_SYS_ALLOCATION_SIZE_LOG`).

### Debugging the allocator

The following functions will also be defined per-allocator. However, they should be considered experimental and unstable as they are linked to the allocator's internal workings.

#### `fio_malloc_sys_alloc_size`

```c
size_t fio_malloc_sys_alloc_size(void);
```

Returns the allocation size used when allocating memory from the system.

#### `fio_malloc_block_size`

```c
size_t fio_malloc_block_size(void);
```

Returns the block size used for allocations. Blocks are slices of system allocations used for allocating memory to the user.

#### `fio_malloc_cache_slots`

```c
size_t fio_malloc_cache_slots(void);
```

Returns the number of cache slots. Cache slots prevent memory chunks from being returned to the system, assuming that the memory will be needed again by the user.

#### `fio_malloc_alignment`

```c
size_t fio_malloc_alignment(void);
```

Returns the allocation alignment set for the allocator.

#### `fio_malloc_alignment_log`

```c
size_t fio_malloc_alignment_log(void);
```

Returns the allocation alignment log set for the allocator.

#### `fio_malloc_alloc_limit`

```c
size_t fio_malloc_alloc_limit(void);
```

Returns the per-allocation size limit, after which a call to `mmap` will be used.

#### `fio_malloc_arena_alloc_limit`

```c
size_t fio_malloc_arena_alloc_limit(void);
```

Returns the per-allocation size limit for an arena based allocation, after which a big-block allocation or `mmap` will be used.

#### `fio_malloc_print_state`

```c
void fio_malloc_print_state(void);
```

Prints information from the allocator's data structure. May be used for debugging.

#### `fio_malloc_print_settings`

```c
void fio_malloc_print_settings(void);
```

Prints the settings used to define the allocator.

### Reserved `FIO_MEMORY` related macros

The following are reserved macro names:

* `FIO_ALIGN_NEW`

* `FIO_ALIGN`

* `FIO_MEMORY_ALIGN_SIZE`

* `FIO_MEMORY_ALLOC_LIMIT`

* `FIO_MEMORY_BIG_ALLOC_LIMIT`

* `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCK_ALLOC_LIMIT`

* `FIO_MEMORY_BLOCKS_PER_ALLOCATION`

* `FIO_MEMORY_SYS_ALLOCATION_SIZE`

* `FIO_MALLOC_TMP_USE_SYSTEM`


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
